Chapter 15
The Element Interactivity Effect




As discussed in Chapter 5, total cognitive load, consisting of intrinsic and extrane-
ous cognitive load, must not exceed working memory resources in order for learn-
ing to be effective. From this perspective, applying learning strategies aimed at
reducing extraneous cognitive load is more important when intrinsic cognitive load
is high. If intrinsic cognitive load is low, a high extraneous cognitive load may not
inhibit learning because the total cognitive load may be well within the available
working memory capacity. Thus, for instructional conditions with a low intrinsic
cognitive load, optimising instructional design may not be as important as for situ-
ations with a high intrinsic cognitive load.
     Intrinsic cognitive load is determined by the level of interactivity between
essential elements of information. If this element interactivity is low, using an
instructional design that causes a high extraneous load may not interfere with
learning. On the other hand, if the level of interactivity between essential elements
of information is high, adding more element interactivity associated with a high
extraneous cognitive load due to a suboptimal instructional design (Chapter 5)
may well result in a total load well in excess of working memory capacity. Under
high intrinsic cognitive load conditions, optimising instructional designs may be
­critical. Therefore, most of the cognitive load effects discussed in the previous
 chapters dealt with instructional conditions under which both intrinsic and extra-
 neous cognitive load were high.
     As examples, when dealing with very few intrinsically interacting elements, it
 may not matter whether learners must use the randomness as genesis principle via
 a random generate and test process to solve a problem or to find relations between
 sources of information presented separately that result in split-attention. Learners
 may have sufficient working memory resources to deal with these situations
 whether they are using the randomness as genesis principle or the borrowing and
 reorganising principle if element interactivity due to intrinsic cognitive load is
 ­sufficiently low.
     The fact that cognitive load effects tend to be obtainable only if intrinsic
  ­cognitive load is high is referred to as the element interactivity effect (Sweller,
   2010; Sweller & Chandler, 1994). This effect depends on the total element



J. Sweller et al., Cognitive Load Theory, Explorations in the Learning Sciences,   193
Instructional Systems and Performance Technologies 1,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-8126-4_15, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011
194                                                    15 The Element Interactivity Effect

i­ nteractivity associated with both intrinsic and extraneous cognitive load. It is
 treated as a separate cognitive load effect because there is substantial empirical
 evidence that levels of element interactivity due to intrinsic cognitive load have
 profound effects on other cognitive load effects associated with extraneous cogni-
 tive load. This chapter consolidates this evidence by explaining in more detail
 some of the studies previously described in Part IV and how they specifically
 relate to element interactivity.



Empirical Evidence for the Element Interactivity Effect

From a theoretical perspective, element interactivity associated with intrinsic
­cognitive load should be a relevant factor for all cognitive load effects, especially
 effects relying on variations in extraneous cognitive load. The element interactivity
 effect has been demonstrated for a large range of extraneous cognitive load effects,
 but has not been tested for all. We will discuss element interactivity associated with
 intrinsic cognitive load for those extraneous cognitive load effects for which data
 are available.



Element Interactivity and the Split-Attention
and Redundancy Effects

In a series of experiments, Sweller and Chandler (1994) and Chandler and Sweller
(1996) tested for split-attention and redundancy effects associated with learning
computer applications using manuals and computers. When both a computer and
a manual are used during instruction, either split-attention or redundancy may
occur (see Chapters 9 and 11). Alternative methods of presentation can be designed
to reduce the extraneous load and facilitate learning in comparison with a
­traditional use of manuals together with hardware such as computers or other
 equipment. Sweller and Chandler suggested that if a properly designed manual
 was used that eliminated split-attention and redundancy, the hardware itself could
 be redundant. Eliminating the hardware during the initial instructional period and
 replacing it by corresponding diagrams with integrated textual explanations in the
 manual were hypothesised to reduce the extraneous cognitive load caused either
 by split-attention between the manual and the hardware or redundancy, where the
 hardware was redundant. For example, in the case of learning to use a computer,
 both the monitor and keyboard can be replaced by diagrams of the computer
 screen and keyboard with textual explanations physically integrated at their appro-
 priate locations on the diagrams. By this procedure, split-attention or redundancy
 that is associated with the presence of the computer itself can be eliminated, thus
 reducing extraneous cognitive load.
Empirical Evidence for the Element Interactivity Effect                            195

   The results of experiments using both computing-based materials as well as
electrical engineering instructions demonstrated both the split-attention and redun-
dancy effects with the modified instructional materials. A format consisting only
of an integrated, self-contained manual outperformed a conventional manual that
did not include integrated diagrams and text demonstrating a split-attention effect.
A self-contained manual format in which learners did not have access to the hard-
ware also outperformed the same self-contained manual along with the actual
computer, thus rendering the hardware redundant and demonstrating the redun-
dancy effect. Furthermore and critically for the current discussion, both the split-
attention and redundancy effects were obtained only in areas where the instructional
material involved a high level of element interactivity.
   In the above studies, the degree of element interactivity was estimated a priori
by counting the number of elements that must be considered simultaneously by
learners with a specific level of expertise in order to learn a particular procedure.
For example, when learning how to use a computer-aided design/computer-aided
manufacture (CAD/CAM) package, the procedure for moving the cursor in 1 mm
steps ‘Press one of four arrow keys’ represents a low element interactivity task that
can be learned easily without reference to other elements such as the function of
other keys. On the other hand, the procedure for moving between any two positions
represents a high element interactivity task for a novice learner as it involves simul-
taneous processing of the following nine interacting elements (Chandler & Sweller,
1996, p. 170):
1. Read horizontal axis value for current position
2. Read vertical axis value for current position
3. Find position of the goal co-ordinate on the horizontal axis
4. Find position of the goal co-ordinate on the vertical axis
5. Find point of intersection for the goal horizontal and vertical positions
6. Calculate the difference between the current and goal positions on the horizontal
   axis
7. Press keys appropriate to value calculated in 6
8. Calculate the difference between the current and goal position on the vertical
   axis
9. Press keys appropriate to value calculated in 8
   When the previously described instructional formats were tested with technical
apprentices, Chandler and Sweller (1996) showed that for instructions that involved
high element interactivity materials, the self-contained modified manual format
demonstrated its superiority over the conventional manual plus computer format
for both written and practical post-tests, demonstrating the split-attention effect.
Similarly, the self-contained, modified manual also was superior to the modified
manual plus computer presentation, thus demonstrating the redundancy effect. No
differences were found between instructional formats when the learning materials
were low in element interactivity.
   Direct evidence that these findings were due to cognitive load rather than
other factors came from measures of cognitive load based on a secondary task.
196                                                     15 The Element Interactivity Effect

The secondary task was presented on a separate computer and involved a tone
that was immediately followed by a letter appearing on the screen. Learners had
to recall the previous letter seen on the screen, while encoding the new letter.
When instructional materials involved low or no interaction between elements of
information and, consequently, a low intrinsic cognitive load, the added extrane-
ous load imposed by differing instructional formats did not substantially inhibit
learner performance on the secondary task. In this case, a sufficient working
memory capacity was still available to perform the secondary task at a high level
irrespective of instructional format. Accordingly, all three groups had little
­difficulty on the secondary task when studying the low element interactivity
 ­segments of the instructional material and performed at similar levels. However,
  the secondary task performance of the conventional manual plus computer
  (split-attention) and the modified manual plus computer (redundancy) groups
  were reduced substantially when high element interactivity instructional
  ­segments were studied.



Element Interactivity and Understanding Instructions

The extent to which we understand instructions depends on levels of element
­interactivity. Increases in levels of element interactivity increase the difficulty of
 understanding as more elements must be processed simultaneously in working
 memory. If the number of elements exceeds the capacity of working memory, the
 material cannot be understood until some of the elements have been incorporated
 into schemas that can be treated as a single element. It is possible to present the
 same information in a form that alters element interactivity by altering the extent to
 which pre-existing schemas are used to process the required elements. If a schema
 can be used to incorporate interacting elements, working memory load can be
 reduced (Marcus, Cooper, & Sweller, 1996).
        Marcus et al. (1996) presented primary school students with electrical resistor
 ­problems. Functionally identical instructions could be presented using either diagrams
  or text. Diagrams tended to be more familiar to learners with each incorporating
  ­several interacting elements. Because of familiarity, those interacting elements could
   be easily incorporated into a schema processed as a single element. The same interact-
   ing elements, presented in textual form, had to be processed as individual elements
   resulting in a large increase in element interactivity and cognitive load compared to
   diagrams. Cognitive load was measured using both subjective measures of load and
   secondary tasks. Results indicated that firstly, the greater the number of interacting
   elements the greater the cognitive load and the harder it was to understand the
   ­information, and secondly, the use of diagrams reduced cognitive load and enhanced
    understanding compared to the same information presented in textual form.
        These experiments clearly established the relations between cognitive load,
    ­element interactivity and understanding. High levels of element interactivity are a
     major impediment to understanding.
Empirical Evidence for the Element Interactivity Effect                             197

Element Interactivity and the Modality Effect

A meta-analysis of modality effect studies by Ginns (2005b) supported element
interactivity as a major moderator of the effect. Tindall-Ford, Chandler, and Sweller
(1997) provided direct experimental evidence for the importance of element
­interactivity in obtaining the modality effect. They found strong effects in favour of
 dual-modality formats in which wiring diagrams or tables were provided with
 ­narrated textual explanations over single-modality formats in which diagrams or
  tables were provided with printed textual explanations. These effects were obtained
  only for materials with high levels of element interactivity. There were no differ-
  ences between spoken and written text for low element interactivity instructions.
      Experiment 1 of Tindall-Ford et al. (1997) used instructional material designed to
demonstrate how to carry out electrical tests of an electrical appliance using a volt-
meter. These materials involved a high degree of element interactivity for a novice
learner. For example, to understand the test of insulation resistance, the learner must
simultaneously consider the required setting for the voltmeter and where to place the
earth lead and the other lead on the kettle, ensure the electric kettle switch is on,
press the test button, know what the required result should be, and then change the
earth lead from the active pin to the neutral pin and perform the test again. The
results of this experiment demonstrated benefits of presenting instructional material
in either an integrated or audio-visual format.
      The instructions used in Experiment 2 constituted table-based information
relating to electrical installation and current-carrying capacity used for selecting
appropriate cables for electrical installations. The instructions required learners to
relate different elements of information and were high in element interactivity. For
instance, the purpose of cable size on the table is only made clear if it is related to
other table entities such as type of cable, core of cable, maximum load of cable
and installation techniques. A modality effect also was obtained in this ­experiment,
  and subjective ratings of cognitive load supported a cognitive load explanation of
  the results.
      Experiment 3 used separate and independent low and high element interactivity
  instructional materials including electrical symbols and electrical circuits. Low
  element interactivity instruction consisted of 30 electrical symbols and their cor-
  responding meanings that could be learned independently of each other. For
  instance, the electrical symbol for a fluorescent lamp could be learned
  ­independently of the symbol for a general switch. High element interactivity
   instructional materials included different electrical circuits and their associated
   explanations. To understand each circuit, many elements and their relationships
   needed to be assimilated simultaneously. The results from the test items, subjec-
   tive rating scales and measures of instructional efficiency indicated strong modality
   effects for materials with high levels of interactivity. On the other hand, when
   learning electrical symbols, there were no differences between instructional pre-
   sentation formats. Again, subjective ratings supported a cognitive load explana-
   tion of the results.
198                                                     15 The Element Interactivity Effect

   Thus, learning materials with high levels of element interactivity (e.g. complex
wiring diagrams) may cause a cognitive overload of the visual channel that may
be further worsened by the extraneous cognitive load due to split-attention
between visually presented sources of information that refer to each other (e.g.
diagrams and printed explanations). Using a dual-modality format may effec-
tively reduce this load and expand cognitive resources available for learning by
engaging both processing channels of working memory. On the other hand, if
learning materials have low levels of element interactivity as occurs, for example,
when learning the meaning of individual electrical symbols, then even relatively
high levels of extraneous cognitive load may still be within working memory
limits and not interfere with learning.




Element Interactivity and the Expertise Reversal Effect

We might expect element interactivity to interact with the expertise reversal effect.
We know that levels of element interactivity are dependent on levels of expertise.
As expertise increases, interacting elements become incorporated within schemas
and can be treated as single elements. As a consequence, element interactivity
becomes less of a problem with increasing expertise. This relation between element
interactivity and levels of expertise gives rise to the interaction between the
element interactivity effect and the expertise reversal effect.
    Kalyuga, Chandler, and Sweller (2001)  compared worked examples-based instruc-
tion on how to construct switching equations for relay circuits with an exploratory
learning environment. When the knowledge level of trainees was increased through
specifically designed training sessions, the exploratory group achieved better results
than the worked examples group. Subjective measures of task difficulty supported the
cognitive load interpretation of the effect.
    In this study, two task levels were used: structurally simple tasks with few circuit
elements and a very limited number of possible options to explore, and structurally
complex tasks with more interactive circuit elements and numerous options to
explore. These two task levels corresponded to low and high levels of element inter-
activity. Simple tasks included only three interacting input elements and allowed
construction of nine different acceptable relay circuits with various possible connec-
tions. Complex tasks required learners to construct and write equations for various
relay circuits containing five interacting input elements, three of which were already
placed into the diagram at fixed locations. This complex task environment allowed
construction of 89 acceptable relay circuits with various possible connections.
    As expected, the expertise reversal effect was obtained only for relatively
­complex tasks with high levels of element interactivity. There were no differences
 between the instructional methods for the simple tasks. For the relatively simple
 circuits, cognitive load was much lower and within the limits of working memory
 for either instructional format.
Conditions of Applicability                                                        199

Element Interactivity and the Imagination Effect

Leahy and Sweller (2005) demonstrated that as primary school students’ experience
in reading a bus timetable and temperature graphs increased, the advantage of
studying worked examples declined in favour of imagining examples, in accord
with the imagination and expertise reversal effects. In addition, the experiments
also showed that as the intrinsic cognitive load imposed by the learning materials
increased, the interaction between these instructional methods and levels of learner
expertise also increased. Both the imagination and the worked example effects were
larger for materials with higher levels of element interactivity than for materials
with lower levels of element interactivity.
   When investigating an imagination effect using bus timetable materials with
primary school students, Leahy and Sweller (2008) experimentally manipulated the
levels of element interactivity in the instructional materials and post-test questions
by varying the complexity of tasks. For example, when students were requested to
find the categories of route numbers for which buses did not stop at every street
(odd numbered routes in the table), they had to simultaneously process many inter-
acting elements in working memory, such as holding the meaning of buses not
stopping at every street, holding the meaning of route numbers, searching for col-
umns with blanks, looking up the route numbers, looking at odd numbers and
checking that they were blank, etc. This task was high in element interactivity. On
the other hand, answering a question such as: ‘What does the letter “e” stand for?’
required only three interacting element to be processed. These elements were: hold-
ing the letter in working memory, searching for ‘e’, and transforming the letter
searched into its appropriate word to provide an answer.
   As predicted, a significant interaction between the imagination effect and levels
of element interactivity was obtained in this study. Imagining materials that were
low in element interactivity resulted in no significant benefits, whereas for high
element interactivity materials, learners who were asked to imagine materials out-
performed learners who were asked only to study the same materials. Imagining
high element interactivity materials allowed learners to combine the multiple inter-
acting elements of information into a single schema that could be more readily
processed in working memory. The results also indicated that greater differences
between the two instructional groups were obtained on post-test questions tapping
high rather than low element interactivity knowledge.


Conditions of Applicability

Similar to the expertise reversal effect (Chapter 12), the element interactivity effect
relies on an interaction between other cognitive load effects and specific factors, in
this case, levels of element interactivity associated with intrinsic cognitive load.
There is also an obvious relation between these two effects as the levels of element
interactivity that produce an intrinsic cognitive load are always relative to levels of
200                                                       15 The Element Interactivity Effect

learner expertise. The same material can reflect a high level of interactivity for a
novice learner and at the same time a low level of interactivity for an expert because
as expertise increases, interacting elements are incorporated into schemas, reducing
working memory load in accord with the environmental organising and linking
principle. Therefore, a complex task for a novice may be a relatively simple one for
an expert. Learners’ prior knowledge allows many interacting elements to be
­incorporated, or chunked, in a single schema acting as a single element in working
 memory. In contrast, learners with low prior knowledge are unable to chunk
 ­information into a single schema and must attempt to simultaneously process the
  interacting elements in working memory.
       Accordingly, lower levels of element interactivity associated with intrinsic
  ­cognitive load are expected to have similar consequences to higher levels of learner
   expertise. As learners acquire more expertise in a specific task domain, the levels
   of element interactivity associated with particular instructional materials change.
   Categories of learning tasks that reflected relatively high levels of element interac-
   tivity become low in element interactivity as expertise increases. Lower levels of
   element interactivity associated with intrinsic cognitive load due to increased
   expertise allow higher levels of extraneous cognitive load to be handled without
   overloading working memory.
       The element interactivity effect defines an essential condition of applicability for
   other cognitive load effects dealing with extraneous cognitive load. Another
   ­condition of applicability of this effect is that intrinsic cognitive load itself should
    not exceed the available working memory resources of learners. For example, when
    dealing with excessively complex materials for which learners do not have ­sufficient
    prior knowledge, very high levels of intrinsic cognitive load may be experienced.
    In this case, cognitive load effects aimed at reducing intrinsic cognitive load need
    to be applied (e.g. the isolated–interacting elements effect, Chapter 16).



Instructional Implications

If element interactivity associated with intrinsic cognitive load is low, adding more
interacting elements associated with a high extraneous cognitive load may not
inhibit learning provided working memory capacity is not exceeded. For example,
if students learn a new foreign language vocabulary in which each new item can be
learned independently from all other items, the manner in which the material is
presented may not matter a great deal as the resulting, total working memory load
will be within available working memory capacity. In this situation, redesigning
instructional procedures or formats by applying cognitive load effects aimed at
reducing extraneous load may have minimal (if any) effects on learning.
    Alternatively, adding the interacting elements associated with a high extraneous
cognitive load to the interacting elements associated with a high intrinsic cognitive
load can exceed working memory capacity. In this situation, reducing the element
interactivity associated with extraneous load by applying appropriate cognitive
Conclusion                                                                           201

load techniques may be critical for learning. For example, if split-attention or
redundancy is incorporated into learning materials with high levels of element
interactivity associated with intrinsic cognitive load such as complex equations or
wiring diagrams in electronics, the total number of interacting elements and
­corresponding total cognitive load may exceed working memory capacity.
 Reducing the number of interacting elements associated with extraneous cognitive
 load by integrating related sources of information or eliminating redundant infor-
 mation can reduce working memory load to manageable levels.



Conclusion

By definition, cognitive load theory is concerned with the instructional implications
of an excessive working memory load. It is not surprising that those instructional
implications are most likely to be manifest when dealing with materials that
­themselves impose a heavy cognitive load irrespective of how they are presented.
 If the element interactivity that leads to an intrinsic cognitive load is low, any addi-
 tional element interactivity due to an extraneous cognitive load may be irrelevant if
 the total cognitive load is within working memory capacity limits. On the other
 hand, with a high level of element interactivity associated with intrinsic cognitive
 load, any additional element interactivity due to an extraneous cognitive load may
 be increasingly important. As a consequence, most cognitive load effects only
 manifest themselves under conditions of a high intrinsic cognitive load leading to
 the element interactivity effect.
     The majority of cognitive load effects occur due to reductions in extraneous
 cognitive load. The element interactivity effect indicates that intrinsic cognitive
 load inevitably is equally important in determining total cognitive load and in deter-
 mining the effectiveness of instructional manipulations carried out in order to
 reduce extraneous cognitive load. Fewer studies have been carried out in which
 intrinsic cognitive load has been directly manipulated. The fact that intrinsic cogni-
 tive load cannot be manipulated if the nature of the task and the expertise of the
 learners remain constant contribute to this dearth of studies. Nevertheless, element
 interactivity due to intrinsic cognitive load can be manipulated by changing the
 nature of a task. That issue is considered in the next chapter.

